Good day i'm Norman Wildberger in today's video
we're going to look further at the euclidean
projective line so we've moved into the projective
setting and imposed a euclidean structure
on the projective line just the one-dimensional
projective setting this is a very simple but
fundamental kind of geometrical arena which
ends up sort of figuring in many higher
geometries it's kind of a basic building
block of geometry because we're talking about
lines through a point just all
the lines through a single point
okay so we're going to talk about the projective
quadrants which we introduced last time and i'll
remind you about this most important formula the
projective triple quad formula and i'm going to
show you how to prove it okay and then we're
going to go on and talk a little bit more about
the structure of this euclidean projective line
in particular we're talking about isometries or
rotations so natural analogs of translations for
the affine line and we're going to see that if
we just observe what's going on that naturally
a lovely algebraic structure emerges on this
one-dimensional projective line so even though
it's a very simple situation it ends up having
an algebraic structure as well as a geometrical
one and it will be an algebraic structure that
will look quite familiar to you especially if
you've had some familiarity with complex numbers
all right so the setup is that we're working
with the projective line which are just
objects like this proportions x to y closed
in square brackets and we're visualizing them
in the usual x y affine plane this is the
line through the point one one this is the
line through the point one five this is the
line to the point five minus one and so on
and we've introduced a euclidean structure on this
projective line by this definition of quadrants
this is how we're going to measure the separation
between two lines say this one and this one
it's going to be a number given two
lines we're going to get a number
and that measurement basically imposes the
euclidean structure on this one-dimensional space
okay and here's the definition it was originally
x1 y2 minus x2y1 squared over x1 squared plus y1
squared x2 squared plus y2 squared and you should
think about that as almost the simplest possible
thing you could do that's sensible because in
the numerator it's encoded the very criterion
that measures whether two lines are
equal two lines are equal these ones here
precisely when that number is zero there and
so we're normalizing that so that it's actually
projectively invariant so it doesn't depend if we
scale the two numbers here or the two numbers here
and then we saw that there was this important
alternate representation of this projective
quadrants as 1 minus x1 x2 plus y1 y2 squared
over the same denominator okay so both of these
ways of looking at things will be very useful
and important and so for example if we have
the line one one and the line five minus one if
we say compute things with the first definition
we take x one times y two minus x2 times
y1 so that's minus 1 minus 5 or minus 6.
we squared we get 36 in the numerator and then
we have to divide by 1 squared plus 1 squared
which is 2 times 5 squared plus 1 squared
which is 26. so it's 36 over 2 times 26.
and i guess there's a factor of 4 that comes out
of the 36 and factor of 4 in the denominator gives
us a 13. so this is the projective quadrance
between these two lines all right so here is
this fundamental result that we talked about
last time the projective triple quad formula
the analog of the triple quad formula from the
affine situation into this projective situation
this formula right here is also known as the
triple spread formula okay that's in the context
of rational trigonometry in the plane so it turns
out that exactly the same formula is one of the
five main formulas of ordinary garden variety
trigonometry in the plane once you do it correctly
in other words once you adopt the point of view
of rational trigonometry but that's actually a
two-dimensional theory which we strictly speaking
haven't got to yet because we're still only at the
one-dimensional level so what we're seeing is that
this formula which is going to play a major role
in the two-dimensional affine theory is already
occurring here in this one-dimensional projective
theory these geometries are connected with each
other okay and here's the formula we have three
projective one points a one a two a three the
three quadrances between them and here's the
relationship between those three quadrances the
sum of all three squared equals twice the sum of
the squares plus this cubic term four times q1
q2 q3 and we'd like to establish this formula
so to start we might as well be specific about
what the three points are so a1 is x1 to y1
a2 is x2 to y2 a3 is x3 to y3 and we'll express
things in terms of those six numbers and what
we're going to do is we're going to establish
not this formula but an equivalent rather shorter
version of it which is asymmetrical we've
seen this for the triple quad formula too
there's the asymmetrical version which is a bit
lopsided is actually more efficient or shorter
okay that's q one plus q two minus q three squared
equals four q one q two times one minus q three
this makes it also quite clear that it's very
close to the standard triple quad formula if
you just remove that last term there you
just get the usual triple quad formula
okay so what we're going to do is we're going
to look at this identity so here's an identity
behold it's an identity involving x1 squared
plus y1 squared and then this sort of determinant
term and then another x2 squared plus
y2 squared and another determinant term
and then another 3 squared plus y of 3
squared but this time with a minus sign
times another 2 by 2 determinant squared
and then that altogether that sum of three
products is perhaps a bit miraculously two
times the product of these three expressions
okay so this is an identity in other
words if you expand the left-hand side
and you expand the right-hand side
you can see that they're equal
so this is the identity upon which this proof
rests the proof ultimately comes down to the
fact that there is this beautiful identity
out there in the world we're using it
okay so what do we do to this identity well
we square both sides and then we divide by
this expression and then we're going to see
that i want to get basically this thing here
why because the q1 is essentially this x2 y3
minus x3 y2 squared divided by this product
times this product so we take the whole thing
and divide by these these three products then the
x1 squared plus y1 squared squared here will
cancel with this one here and we'll just end up
with a q1 inside the bracket this term similarly
is giving us the q2 after we divide by this thing
and this thing here giving us the minus q3
on the right hand side after we've squared
things there's a 4 here then this q1 is this
thing squared divided by again that product
the q2 is this thing squared
divided by this product and finally
this expression here divided by the two
remaining terms which i guess are these ones
will be 1 minus q3 that's the sort of
alternate or second formula for the
projective quadrants that we had
involving that dot product term
so this is a direct consequence of this
beautiful identity once we square it
and divide both sides by this common denominator
that's magic admittedly so an exercise
verify this identity convince yourself that this
identity actually is true so that proof that i
gave you you can follow on your own with a little
bit of work without having to resort to a computer
of course another proof would be just to take the
whole expression take everything to the left-hand
side and get your computer to evaluate everything
and it will evaluate everything to zero completely
automatic kind of proof but you might well ask how
could we establish this formula in the first place
in other words how could you have discovered this
formula when i asked you to try to discover it
in our last video all right so one thing that
you could have done is said well we have these
three quantities q1 q2 and q3 these expressions
involving these x1s x2s y1s and y2s and so on
one thing we could try is the standard triple quad
formula because it's a kind of triple quad formula
so why don't we apply archimedes formula
to these three things and see what we get
if they satisfy the standard triple quad
formula you'd expect to get zero okay this
is a projective setting they're not going to
satisfy the affine triple quad formula but
nevertheless when you calculate this thing here
you discover that it simplifies to 4 q 1 q 2 q 3.
another kind of miracle occurs and then you
observe that the quantity that you actually want
this s of a b c is just the difference
between this thing and for a b c
okay another quite different possible
approach you could have used was to
use some of your understanding of classical
trigonometry because i gave you a hint last time i
told you that these projective quadrances that we
were talking about could be related to classical
trigonometry as long as you believe that story
which you probably shouldn't but let's play along
because the projective quadrants q is actually
the square of the sine of a corresponding angle
so here are three lines and say
this is the theta one that angle
then the corresponding projective quadrants
would be sine squared of theta one
so we could use the fact that we know
that there's a relationship between
the three angles theta 1 theta 2 and theta 3. so
there must be some relationship between the signs
and then we can perhaps figure out the
relationship between the square of the
signs and then that will be the projective triple
quad formula so the way you could have proceeded
is first of all let's just use a little shortcut
let's say that s i stands for sine of theta i
okay we have theta 1 theta 2 theta 3. so
if theta 1 plus theta 2 equals theta 3
then if you remember some of your classical
trigonometry then the sine of this thing can be
written in terms of sines and cosines of these two
it can be written as sine of theta 1 times cosine
theta 2 plus sine of theta 2 times cosine theta 1.
i'm using s's and c's instead of sines and cosines
okay so this has cosines in it so what
do we do well we square everything
usual kind of thing so if we square s3 we'll
get the projective quadrant q3 if we square this
we get the square of this term plus the square
of this term plus twice the product okay but this
cosine squared is 1 minus sine squared so is that
one there so if we bring those to the other side
we get a q3 minus q1 times 1 minus q2 and also
minus q2 times one minus q1 and all of that on
the right hand side we'll be left with this and
then if we square everything once again so we get
that whole thing squared we're going to get the
square of this which is four the square of this
is q1 the square of the s2 is q2 and the square
of the two cosines are 1 minus q1 and 1 minus q2
we get a relation just involving q1 q2 and q3
so you can think about this as a an exercise
in classical trigonometry if i just asked you
you have three lines and three angles they form
what's the relationship between the squares of the
signs of those three angles it's the same question
of course this thing doesn't quite look
like the projective triple quad formula
but it's just a rearrangement of it so if you just
rearrange this you will see that it's
equivalent to the projective triple quad formula
all right so please check these arguments if you
are have some familiarity with classical trig
now you might say well wait a minute but you don't
believe in classical trig which is exactly correct
i don't believe in it because the angles are
problematic they involve infinite processes and
these functions sine and cosine are problematic
because they also involve infinite series at least
the way they're usually presented but nevertheless
you can see that there's some content here
although they may not make logical sense the way
we usually think about them and we'll have to
talk about that at length at some future time
still we can extract some useful information
from them of course there's lots of useful
information to be extracted from these things
so the possibility arises that we may still be
able to resuscitate sine and cosine in the future
but in some more modest and logically
coherent fashion than currently there are many
interesting consequences of this projective
triple quad formula here is one very important
consequence it's the situation that you have
when you have three projective one points and
the projective quadrants between two pairs
are equal so if quadrants between a1 and a2
equals the quadrants between a2 and a3 let's
say the common value is q then the question is
what is the third quadrant in terms of q so this
equal p quadrance's theorem says that in that case
the quadrants between a1 and a3 is either zero
or this quantity four times q times 1 minus q
this is a quite an important expression in
rational trigonometry 4 times q times 1 minus q
okay so let's prove this so we're going
to use the projective triple quad formula
let's let this quadrant be equal to
r so that everything has a short form
so we have two quadrances q and one
quadrants r so let's just plug those in
to the triple quad formula there's a q plus
q plus r all squared equals 2 times q squared
plus q squared plus r squared plus 4 times
the product which will be q squared times r
what can we deduce from that well we expand
things out here this is 2q plus r all squared
square the first term is 4q squared
twice the product will be 4 q times r
plus the square of the second term is r squared
here we have four q squared plus
two r squared plus this last term
okay there's a four q squared on this side and
this side they're going to cancel there's an r
squared here and a 2r squared when we bring that
to the other side it'll be a single r squared
so there'll be still the 4q squared
r on this side and if we bring the
4qr on the other side it'll have a minus
sign so zero on the left-hand side and this
on the right-hand side there's a common
factor of r here which we'll pull out
leaving r plus four q squared minus four q
so if the product of two things equal zero
then there are two possibilities either r
equals zero or this quantity equals zero
which we can write as r equals four q minus four
q squared and this is 4 times q times 1 minus q
so it turns out that this particular polynomial
is quite a famous one it's called the logistic map
it's often written as x goes to four x
times one minus x and we're going to give it
a name we'll call it s sub two capital s sub
two of x as a function as like in calculus
x y here's the graph of the function y equals
4x times 1 minus x it's a parabola because it's
quadratic it's opening downward because it's minus
x squared times something and it turns out that it
goes through zero and one of
course because those are the zeros
and it turns out that it's nicely contained
in the sort of one by one box go from zero
to one here and from zero to one here
there's a nice little square box there
and this function just nicely sort of fits
inside here of course it extends beyond it
but it's actually the values between zero and
one which are critical for this particular
application okay so an easy exercise just to have
a play with this particular polynomial or poly
number might be a better way of thinking about it
that s two of one is zero s two of a half happens
to be one s two of a quarter equals three quarters
s three of three chord is equal to three quarters
so this for example is telling you that if
you have a projective quadrance of a quarter
which is about like this actually that corresponds
to 30 degrees and then you have another 30 degrees
the total is 60 degrees which is the angle
analog of protective quadrants of three-quarters
so this polynomial s2 of s is in fact one of
a whole family of remarkable polynomials we'll
call them spread polynomials so s1 s happens
to be s and here's s2 and you can have a look
at s3 s4 and s5 and it keeps on going and this
is a very interesting development in the theory
of orthogonal polynomials which we'll have
lots to say about later on so it turns out
that these are sort of remarkable modern
improvements on the chebyshev polynomials
remarkable that such a thing is possible
but that's what it turns out to be
so we'll be talking more about this projective
triple quad formula coming back to it right now i
wanted to switch a little bit to another aspect
of this rich one-dimensional projective line
i want to talk a little bit about rotations
and things called isometries and to motivate
that let's have a look at the corresponding affine
situation so we go back to the affine line a1 with
our ordinary quadrants which is now capital q just
given by the difference in coordinates squared
then this euclidean structure that's
sort of imposed on the affine line by
specifying this metrical structure is
associated to it some important symmetries
and these symmetries are translations so what
we're talking about here is the possibility of
translating points on the affine line
in such a way as to preserve quadrants
so here's how we're going to define that so
let's introduce some symbols t sub k where k
is a rational number and let's define this
combination if we have an i find one point
x right here and the symbol t sub k beside
it on the right that this combination means
the new affine one point x plus k
so we're defining what this particular
combination of symbols means
and we'll interpret this as saying well this is
the result of taking this one point and applying
the translation t sub k we're translating it
by k which is what we're doing geometrically
so if we had a one here and we translated by
three well we would get up to this point a1
prime we had a2 here and translated it by 3 we
get a2 prime and the key fact about this is that
when you take a given translation t sub k and
apply it to two points a one a two the quadrants
doesn't change the initial quadrants which would
here have been uh two squared or four is the same
as the final quadrants also two squared or four
it's kind of obvious just the fact that if you
add k to this number and you add k to this number
then they cancel and the quadrance doesn't change
okay this property of preserving a quadrance
of doing something and the quadrance is still
the same as it was before even though the points
have moved we call that in mathematics an isometry
it's a special kind of term refer to a situation
where we have a geometry with a metrical structure
and we're moving things in such a way that the
metrical structure is essentially unchanged
now there's an important additional
aspect of these translations
namely that once we multiply by a translation
to get another i find one point there's
nothing to stop us from multiplying by another
translation say t sub l so performing t sub k
moves it or translates it by k and then performing
t sub l or multiplying by t sub l is another
translation by l and the combined effect of
those two things is a translation by k plus l
so the translations themselves the symbols
naturally support a simple kind of algebraic
structure take one translation combine
it or compose it with another translation
and you get another translation which at
the level of the indices is just addition
so the translations have an algebraic structure
you can do t sub k and then you can do t sub
l it's like multiplying them we write it like a
multiplication because that works with the this
symbolics that we've introduced of just writing
the symbol to the right of what it's acting on
okay so with that introduction the affine
situation we now want to investigate
what's the corresponding story for the
projective line it's considerably more
subtle there all right so let's have a look at
the projective line with this euclidean structure
given by this projective quadrants that we've
defined okay so we have lines through a point
and we have this projective quadrants that for
example allows us to define perpendicularity
so in this case there are also important
symmetries which we might call rotations
okay and to motivate that let's have
a look at a couple of special lines
so this line here it's actually a projective
one point but physically it looks like a line
it's given by one to zero and this one is zero to
one these are naturally perpendicular these two
now another example of perpendicular ones
is to take some other lines say a to b
and the corresponding one over
here which is minus b to a
okay so the quadrants between these two is equal
to one and that ensures that they're perpendicular
that's our definition of perpendicularity okay
so what we want to get at is a a way of rotating
this one-dimensional situation we want to rotate
in such a way that this line here goes to this one
and that correspondingly this
line here goes to this one
so this is a kind of a familiar situation if
you've done a little bit of linear algebra in two
dimensions but maybe some of you haven't done that
so let me just sort of show you some formulas okay
what we're going to do is we're basically going to
encode this rotation but we're going to do so only
at the level of one-dimensional things so here is
a new symbol it's called row of a to b and it's
going to represent this rotation here that's
in red okay and what the symbol does when you
put it to the right of a projective one point
is it gives you another projective one point
but this one's not quite as simple as in
the affine case where we just added k to the
coordinate here we're doing something a little bit
more complicated because there's two coordinates
here and there's actually also two sort of indices
or labels to our rotation so the rule is that
we're going to take a x minus b y for the first
entry and then the second entry is b x plus a y
okay so let's try to convince you that this
is a reasonable expression that would encode
this rotation that we've got visualized here
suppose we apply this to the special case where
we have one zero if x is one and y is zero
that's this line here what's going to happen
x is one y is 0. x is 1 y 0. we're going
to get a to b we're going to get this
line here so yes indeed if we have a 1 0
over here then we'd have an a b over here
what happens if we have a 0 1 over here in
other words we're talking about this line
so if x is 0 and y is 1 x is 0 y is 1.
they're going to get over here minus b
to a which is exactly this one here
so if we input 0 1 we're going to get out minus
ba if we input 1 0 we're going to get out a b
so this thing does have the same
physical effect as what we would like to think
is the rotation that sends this thing to a b
okay so this could be written using a bit of
projective linear algebra which we haven't
yet officially talked about and we will but
just to connect for some of you i know who
know a bit of linear algebra here's another way of
writing the same formula involving a little bit of
sort of matrix multiplication so here's a vector
x y or actually we've sort of made it a matrix
actually the square brackets in this
case since there's no comma it's going to
represent for us a projective matrix maybe
a slightly new idea similarly this thing
here is also a projective matrix it means
that it's supposed to be unchanged if we
multiply by a scalar all right so this little
matrix a b minus ba which is the two by two array
there's a way of multiplying this matrix
with this matrix to give exactly the
new matrix ax minus b y and bx plus ay
okay so if you're not familiar with linear algebra
well you could always watch my wild analges series
okay but don't worry we are going to be talking
about matrices and multiplication and so on more
formally and officially and correctly and so
on okay but i just want to connect for those
of you who have know a little bit about that
so i want to connect this formula with this
it's really just taking x y and multiplying it by
this particular projective matrix so this rotation
of this one-dimensional predictive space is
encoded by this little matrix a b minus b
a that depends on the line a to b so that
formula that we defined certainly fitted with
our geometrical intuition about what a rotation
ought to be but here is the theorem that really
solidifies the importance of it called the
rotation isometry theorem that if we denote this
symbol rho a to b more succinctly by rho then
the quadrants between a1 rho and a2 rho is the
same as the quadrants between a1 and a2 for
any two points a1 a2 on our projective line
so you take any two lines compute the
quadrants between them projector quadrants
then you apply this row so
both of them get rotated
and the new quadrants between them is the same
as the oil quadrants between them exactly the
same kind of thing that happens with translation
in the affine situation it preserves quadrants
so this is now deserving to be called an
isometry because it preserves quadrants
okay we want to prove this so we
introduce a1 and a2 as we usually do
and we write down this side here okay rho
is just row of a to b so we know how to
evaluate a1 times rho this is a x1 minus b y1
there are two entries and then bx1 plus a y one
and the way row acts on a two that
multiplication there is the same
kind of thing a x two minus b
y two to b x two plus a y two
so we are asked to take the quadrants
between these two projective one points
okay what's going to be involved in that
quadrance well there's a term that's the
numerator the term in the numerator is this
times this minus this times this all squared
so if we take this thing times that one
and subtract this one times that one
and stare at it for a little
while we can expand things out
and we're going to get for example a x1 here
with an a y2 that'll be a squared times x1 y2
and the b squares here b
squared y 1 x 2 will appear
and over here there will be an a squared with an x
2 y 1 and a plus b 2 plus b squared times x 1 y 2.
but there will also be some cross
terms for example ax1 times bx2
with a plus sign but that will be cancelled
with the bx1 times what did i say ax2 yes
so the bx1 times ax2 will have a minus sign
over here a plus sign over here they will cancel
and similarly the y1 and the y2 term here with
an ab y1 y2 with a minus sign here and over here
y1 y2 with an a and b with altogether a plus sign
over there so they will cancel so this is all that
we get and then there's a a squared common here
and there's a b squared common here and we can
see that we can factor this thing as the product
of a squared plus b squared times x1 y2 minus x2y1
so when we take the quadrants of these two things
this is what appears in the numerator
but it ends up being squared
okay what about the denominator well we have to
take this thing squared plus this thing squared
that's one of the factors let's see what that
looks like we take this thing squared plus this
thing squared well again the cross terms cancel
and we get a squared x 1 squared and there's an a
squared y1 squared here so this thing factors as a
squared plus b squared x1 squared plus y1 squared
you might recognize this as a
identity that you already know
and there's a corresponding
situation for this thing squared
plus this thing squared it also factors in the
same kind of way so that's what you get when we uh
work it out and then these two terms cancel and
we get the original quadrants between a1 and a2
so this shows us that yes indeed this operation of
sort of multiplying by this symbol the way we've
defined it really does preserve our projective
quadrants it deserves to be called an isometry
or rotation okay so when we
were thinking about translations
of the affine plane we noted that we could compose
two translations to get a third translation
that basically amounted to addition of
the underlying labels for the translations
something very similar happens
here with these rotations if we
compose one rotation with another rotation so
if we start with the projective one point x to y
and we multiply by the rotation row a to b
and then take that projective one point and
multiply by another rotation say row c to d then
we can evaluate that because the first thing is
a x minus b y to b x plus a y that's
how we define this product here
and we still have to then multiply this by row c
to d okay how do we do that that's a little bit
more complicated that's going to be also another
projective one point obtained by taking c times
the first one minus d times the second and over
here d times the first plus c times the second
okay and then you stare at
this and you see that the x's
have coefficient ac minus b d and
the y's on this side have coefficient
altogether minus a d plus b c there's a b c
there with a minus sign so that's all right
and over here if we sort of factor out the x
there's an x times a d here and plus b c there
and the y terms there's a plus a c
from there and a minus b d from there
and now when we look at this we see that
this is also in the form of a rotation
because this coefficient and
this coefficient are the same
and these two coefficients are negatives of each
other that's the same story as over here this
coefficient and this coefficient are the same and
these two are negatives of each other so we can
write this combined rotation as x y acted on by
a single rotation a row ac minus bd to ad plus bc
and now if we just write down the essence
of it it's really that this rotation
followed by this rotation that combination when
you act on by x to y is the same as this rotation
and what we're getting is really
an algebraic structure on our
underlying projective line
because this is just a projective
one point and here's another projective one
point and what we really have here is a way of
multiplying two projective one points
to give us a third projective one point
now this one times this one equals another one
so our euclidean structure that we've imposed
on the projective line somehow has created
a natural multiplicative structure
on the underlying protective line
so naturally it's interesting to ask well what
does this arithmetic look like those of you who
are familiar with complex numbers of course will
say wait a minute this is just the way we multiply
complex numbers this is like a plus b i times c
plus d i is ac minus b d plus i times a d plus bc
so somehow the essential formula of complex
numbers is already contained just in this one
dimensional situation one dimensional situation
but it's really a a one-dimensional version of the
multiplication of complex numbers
we're not multiplying vectors here
we're multiplying lines through
the origin or projective one points
so next time we're going to investigate
this algebraic structure further
and we're going to talk about a big generalization
of it so we'll look at the same picture but
in a wider view introducing some other metrical
structures onto that same projective one line
so our picture gets bigger and bigger
i hope you'll join me for that i'm
norman wildberger thanks for listening